---
layout: post
title: "Using Rhythmic Patterns as an Input Method"
description: ""
category:
tags: []
---

Emilien Ghomi from the Universit√© Paris-Sud received a *best paper* award at
the 2012 ACM CHI (Human-Computer Interaction) conference last year for a paper
describing the effectiveness of [using rhythmic patterns as an input method](http://scholar.google.com/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=Using+Rhythmic+Patterns+as+an+Input+Method&as_oq=&as_eq=&as_occt=any&as_sauthors=Ghomi).

The motiation for the research was simple: rhythm is a natural part of life.
Recognizing and reproducing rhythms is considered a fundamental human ability,
by psychologists, and it could prove to be an effective input method in a
computer interface. Games are an excellent example of using rhythm as input,
especially when the games are music-related (e.g. Guitar Hero). Physiological
psychologists have determined that humans have an innate sense of rhythm, and
in Human-Computer Interaction, existing interfaces use timing to distinguish
between different types of user behaviors (e.g. a double click on a mouse).

The primary advantage of rhythmic input involve its simplicity: unlike
gestures, rhythmic input requires very little space and can be detected very
accurately.

The researchers conducted two experiments, the first of which involved 12
participants (5 of whom never had any experience playing music) who were
instructed to repeat rhythmic patterns on the touchpad of a 13-inch MacBook
that were displayed to them using a static graphic, visual animation, and audio
representation. Additionally, participants were given different types of
feedback to facilitate learning. The overall success rate was 64.3%, but the
researchers note that the recognizer used in the experiment was very strict. In
practice, a much higher accuracy rate could be obtained by reducing the
vocabulary of rhythms and increasing the margin of error for allowed input. A
second experiment testing the recall rate of rhythms associated with
different commands resulted in an initial recall rate of 74%, but an improved
recall rate of 93% in a later test.

The most interesting applications of rhythmic input seem to be in mobile
devices, like smartphones and tablets with built-in touchscreens. So far,
gestures have been the primary input method (swipe, pinch, etc.), but rhythms
may be an effective method of user input in situations where a person is not
looking directly at the screen or the touchscreen itself is obscured (the
rhythms may be captured using an accelerometer).
